A four round elevating tube launcher turret is used, mounting the Ku-band Automatic Command to Line Of Sight monopulse radar dish antenna. Export variants are the FM-80 and improved FM-90 with a FLIR tracker and longer ranging missiles. HQ-7/FM-80/90 batteries are typically supported by an acquisition radar system, the FM-90 usually on a new design indigenous 6 x 6 light armoured personnel carrier.

The HQ-7 is a Chinese clone of the French Thales/Thomson CSF Crotale SAM. During the 1970s the French supplied samples of the Crotale which was promptly reverse engineered. The cloned Crotale has been built in two configurations, a high mobility variant for PLA Army units on a 4 x 4 cloned French Thomson-Hotchkiss P4R armoured vehicle, and a less mobile PLA-AF air field defence system, using either a trailer or a truck platform. Since then, derivative variants have emerged in the FM-90 series, in addition to the shipboard variants. The Thomson-Hotchkiss P4R vehicle uses either a diesel or gasoline engine driving an alternator which powers electrical motors driving the wheels. Chinese sources sometimes label the P4R as a B-20. A naval variant of the Crotale as also been developed.

China was supplied by France with a small number of Crotale and Sea Crotale systems during the late 1970s, for evaluation purposes. The post Tiananmen embargo prevented import of production quantities. Chinese sources claim that the 2 nd Academy reverse engineered the missiles, the 23 rd Institute the radar systems, and the 206 th Institute the Hotchkiss P4R vehicle. The reverse engineered Crotale and Sea Crotale entered production about a decade later, designated the HQ-7 and HHQ-7 respectively. Export variants have been designated FM-80, and FM-90 in the evolved variant. In terms of capabilities and performance the HQ/HHQ-7/FM-80/90 closely compare to the Soviet/Russian built Almaz-Antey/Kupol 9K331M/M1 Tor M/M1 SA-15B/C Gauntlet and early configurations of the KBP 2K22M1/2S6M1 Tunguska-M1/ SA-19 Grison SPAAGM missile system. The key difference is that both Soviet/Russian systems integrate the acquisition radar on the TELAR, and were designed like the 9K33 Osa / SA-8 Gecko before them, to “shoot and scoot”, providing high mobility point defence capability for land force manoeuvre elements. The baseline Crotale, which is the basis of the HQ-9, was built for rapid intra- and inter-theatre redeployment, but limited “shoot and scoot” capability. The original design aim of the Crotale was to engage supersonic low flying fighters, to provide a rapid reaction terminal point defence for airfields, and other high value static or redeployable targets. PLA Crotale units appear to remain dedicated to this role. The kinematic performance of the Crotale missile and angular field of regard of the engagement radar are both compatible with the “Counter-PGM” role, which has now become the primary role of the Russian 96K6E Pantsir S1E / SA-22 and 9K331M2E Tor M2E / SA-15D. While the new acquisition radar for the HQ-7B / FM-90 has the technological potential for use in this role - it employs the same antenna technology as the 9K331M2E Tor M2E / SA-15D - there is no evidence to date that the PLA intends to reorient the operational use of the HQ-7B to “Counter-PGM” role. Equally so, there is no evidence of any indigenous PLA effort to develop a unique replacement for the HQ-7/HHQ-7 series. Given the past propensity of the PLA to extract every possible use out of a mature design, and the inherent growth potential of the Crotale family as demonstrated by the evolution of EU Crotale variants, the most likely outcome is that the HQ-7/HHQ-7 will continue to evolve new variants for the forseeable future.

The Crotale Mk.3 is a further evolution of the Crotale NG. The improved missile round has a range of 16 kilometres, and ceiling of 9 kilometres, and the new Shikra 3D multibeam surveillance radar is a derivative of the Thales Netherlands SMART-S Mk.2 radar. Variants of the Crotale have been deployed by France, Finland, Greece, Portugal, South Africa, South Korea, Bahrain, Egypt, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE. Chinese HQ-7 Crotales have been exported to Iran, and an Iranian assembled variant has been marketed.

Crotale 2000 Series (1973): Enhanced acquisition and tracking by addition of a television channel; addition of IFF capability for deconfliction. Crotale 3000 Series (1978): Further enhanced tracking capability by addition of automatic television track capability. R460/Shahine/SICA (1980): Unique variant developed for Saudi Arabia following a 1975 order. The Crotale weapon system was rehosted on the Giat AMX-30 tank chassis to improve mobility in soft terrain and survivability against hostile fire, as the Shahine was intended to provide fully mobile air defence for armoured manoeuvre formations. Crotale 4000 Series (1983): Replacement of cable interconnections with the LIVH (Liaison Inter Vehicule Hertzienne) radio datalink, which permits separation of up to 3 kilometres between TELARs and ACU, and up to 10 kilometres between proximate ACUs. Improved radar ECCM and addition of thermal imaging tracker channel. Crotale 5000 Series (1985): Modernisation of French Crotale systems incorporating a an optical tracker and improved radar antenna to permit acquisition out to 18 kilometres range. Crotale NG (1990): The Crotale NG (New Generation) is a deep redesign of the basic Crotale, in which the legacy missile round is replaced by a new VT-1 hypervelocity round which provides a 35 G manoeuvre capability, Mach 3.5 speed, 11 kilometre range, and an 8 metre lethal radius using a new directional warhead. The radar and fire control systems were improved, and the acquisition radar colocated on the turret with the TELAR launchers and engagement radar, making the system fully mobile. The Crotale NG is supplied self-propelled on a range of different chassis, or on a towed 3 axle trailer. Crotale Mk.3 (2008):

The origins of the prolific Crotale family of missiles lie in a South African order placed in 1964 with French radar and systems integration contractor Thomson-Houston (later Thomson CSF and now Thales ) for the development of a point defence SAM system. Funded mostly by the South Africans, and partly by the French government., the system was developed through the late 1960s. The South Africans took delivery of their systems between 1971 and 1973, naming them the Cactus in operational service. The French air force soon ordered the system for airfield point defence use, acquiring twenty batteries by 1978, and naming the system the Crotale , or Rattlesnake [1, 2, 3] . Since the first Crotale was ordered almost 40 years ago, the system has remained in production and a wide range of variants and configurations have been built and exported. The Crotale remains one of the most successful SAM designs ever built, with over 300 systems exported to 15 nations. The basic design concept and the performance of the early Crotale is closest in most respects to its Soviet contemporary, the early variants of the NIEMI 9K33 Osa / Romb or SA-8 Gecko . Where the two systems diverge is in the regime of deployment, as until the most recent Crotale NG , the Crotale system was mobile but split across multiple cable connected TELARs and an Acquisition and Co-ordination Unit (ACU) equipped with an acquisition radar; the SA-8 and Crotale NG colocate the engagement and acquisition units on the single TELAR and are capable of autonomous operation.