On September 28, 2017, LOTN, a.s. was visited by a delegation of representatives from several headquarters and Commanding Offices of allied forces in Afghanistan focused primarily on training and comprehensive support of development of capabilities of Afghan security forces. The long-term intent of these Allied Commands and Offices is to build sustainable and effective Afghan National Defense and Security Forces supporting the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

The purpose of the visit was in particular to observe the actual state of repairs of four Mi-17 Afghan helicopters contracted under the NSPA agreement.

After welcoming of the delegation by the Chairman of the Board of Directors and the General Director Mr. JUDr. Martin Dušanič, the Commercial Director Mr. Vladimír Šimanský, MBA presented the actual state of conducted repairs of Afghan helicopters Mi-17 along with other information about the company. Presentation was delivered directly in the repair hall.

The presentation highlighted the utmost interest of LOTN, a.s. in the successful outcome of the repairs and management focus of all activities at different levels of company to meet this goal. Originally planned timeframe of helicopter repairs was influenced by complicated negotiations with Russian partners which was in details explained, including a viewpoint personally delivered by the representative of Rosoboronexport – LOTN’s main partner in Russia.

Commercial Director, Mr. Vladimír Šimanský further emphasized the proactive approach of LOTN, a.s. in the area of financial backing of repair works for the NSPA project along with the timely purchase of key spare parts, renovation of repair workplace areas, personnel arrangements for recruiting new employees and training of technical personnel.

After the presentation, the visit continued with a survey of selected workplaces within the company. In conclusion, the result of the visit was very positive, thanks to all employees of LOTN, a.s. who have so far actively participated in the NSPA project. This result creates good grounds for repairs of other helicopters under the NSPA contract which at the end boosts the further development of the company.