December 21, the National Assembly convened the final sitting of the 6th session. Members of the government headed by the President of the Republic of Artsakh Bako Sahakyan participated in the planned budget discussions.

Welcoming those present, NA President Ashot Ghoulyan underlined the fact of the practical and trustful cooperation between the legislative and executive branches of power within the framework of the budget draft discussions as a testimony to the continuing formation of the constitutional culture.

After making an addendum to the agenda of the session and approving the agenda of the sitting, the parliament continued discussion of the draft 2018 budget of the Republic of Artsakh, interrupted on December 14. Representing the project, the Minister of Finance of the Republic of Artsakh, Grigory Martirosyan, noted that the factions and MPs of the National Assembly submitted 32 proposals worth 4.8 billion drams at the second stage. Based on the results of the proposals of the government and the National Assembly on the finalized draft state budget, the final figures were: revenues - 96 billion 428 million drams, expenses - 101 billion 538 million drams, and deficit - 5 billion 110 million drams.

“Renaissance” and “Movement-88” factions have presented their justifications for voting against the draft budget, while “Democracy”, “Dashnaktsutyun” and “Motherland” factions have come up with a stance for "for".

State Minister Arayik Harutyunyan, in his closing speech on the project, touched upon the inter-state credit rating of the representatives of the factions, optimization of the state apparatus, reforms in the sphere of education, and concerns regarding capital construction projects.

The parliament voted early and adopted the package of draft laws "On the Budgetary System of NKR" and "Taxes" of the Republic of Artsakh, and then passed the law Republic of Artsakh "On the 2018 State Budget of the Republic of Artsakh" with 28 for, 4 against and 0 abstentions.

Expressing gratitude for the joint work on the draft budget, President of the Artsakh Republic Bako Sahakyan noted that the proposals submitted by parliamentarians, which were not included in the state budget, will be taken into account by the Government during the year.

After a short break, the parliament continued its legislative work.

The Minister of Justice Ararat Danielyan presented the draft law of the Republic of Artsakh "On Amendments to the Law of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic" On the Civil Service on Emergency Situations ", the discussion of which was postponed at the previous meeting on his initiative for further discussion in the lead committee.

Then Ararat Danielyan submitted to the parliament the issue of adopting the law of the Republic of Artsakh "On the Protection of Human Rights" in the second reading.

Minister of Labor, Social Affairs and Resettlement Samvel Avanesyan presented the draft law "On Compensation for Damage Caused to the Life and Health of the Servicemen during Defense of the Republic of Artsakh" by the legislative package, and accepted it in the second reading.

All the above bills have been approved by the parliament.

Touching upon the issue on the election of the chairman of the NA Standing Committee on Social Affairs and Health included in the agenda of the meeting, the Head of the NA informed that on December 8 the Chairman of the Commission Aram Grigoryan presented the resignation letter. Quoting point 2 of part 4 and part 5 of article 124 of the NA Standing Committee, Ashot Ghoulyan noted that factions can nominate a new candidate for this post.

Artur Tovmasyan, Chairman of the NA "Motherland" faction, has suggested Ararat Ohanjanyan, the deputy of the same faction. Based on the results of the secret ballot (30 for and 0 against), the National Assembly passed a decision on electing Ararat Ohanjanyan to the position of Chair of the Standing Committee on Social Affairs and Health.

During the meeting, the parliament also considered the appointment of judges. According to Part 1 of Article 139 of the Constitution of the Republic of Artsakh and Part 1 of Article 125 of the National Assembly's Rules, the Supreme Judicial Council submitted nominations of Norayr Arakelyan and Lusine Aghabekyan to the National Assembly for election of the general jurisdiction judges of first instance.

According to the decision adopted on the basis of the secret ballot, Norayr Arakelyan (27 for and 3 against) and Lusine Aghabekyan (30 for and 0 against) were appointed the judges and took office with the ceremony of taking the oath.

Continuing legislative work, the parliament considered the draft law of the Republic of Artsakh "On Making Amendments and Additions to the Electoral Code of the Republic of Nagorno-Karabakh", submitted by Justice Minister Ararat Danielyan. The Minister noted that the adoption of the draft law is aimed at regulating the normal activities of local government bodies before the legislative changes envisaged in the Constitution in the sphere of local self-government.

Introducing the package of the draft laws of the Republic of Artsakh "On Making Amendments and Addenda to the Law of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic" On Lotteries "and on Making Amendments to the Law of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic On Fixed Payments, Minister of Finance Grigory Martirosyan stressed that the adoption of the law is aimed at ensuring the prerequisites for the introduction of an electronic reporting system and publication of lottery tickets, as well as reducing the amount of fixed payments to create a more favorable environment for the development of the sphere.

In accordance with the requirements of the new Constitution, Minister Martirosyan submitted to the National Assembly of the Republic of Artsakh the amendments to the NKR Law "On Tax Service", the amendments to the NKR Law "On Organization and Execution of Checks in the Nagorno Karabakh Republic" and the Law "On State Duty" The package of Draft Laws of the Republic of Artsakh on Making Amendments to the Law of the Republic of Karabakh.

With the justification for bringing it in line with the requirements of the new Constitution, Minister Martirosyan presented to the National Assembly a package of draft laws of the Republic of Artsakh "On Amendments to the Law of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic on the Tax Service", "On Amendments to the Law of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic" inspections in the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic "and" On Amending the Law of the Nagorno Karabakh Republic on the State Duty, "as well as the draft law of the Republic of Artsakh" On Amendments and Additions to the Law Nagorno-Karabakh Republic "On payment of persons holding public office".

The National Assembly adopted all of the above laws.

Summing up the session, the Head of the Parliament highlighted the important events and achievements of the National Assembly of the 6th convocation and noted that 61 laws have been adopted during the session. Ashot Ghoulyan expressed gratitude to the MPs and journalists, for effective work and congratulated them on the coming New Year holidays.