Metro Manila (CNN Philippines, August 15) — The Department of National Defense presented their 2018 budget proposal — 8 percent higher than their 2017 proposal — before the Lower House on Tuesday.

DND's original proposed 2018 budget was at P224.4 billion, but the Department of Budget and Management only approved P195.4 billion.

DND said 42 percent or P82 million would go to personal services, 18 percent or P35 billion will be allotted for maintenance and other operating expenses, 14 percent or P27 billion will go to capital outlay, while 26 percent or P50 billion of the budget proposal will be allocated for the pension and gratuity fund.

Aside from purchasing equipment, the budget would also be allocated to building a veterans' hospital outside Manila, among others.

Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana said the DND needs about P200 billion per year to complete AFP's modernization.

President Rodrigo Duterte on July 25 said the Philippines will have a "strong" Armed Forces after two years.

Related: Duterte to strengthen armed forces for war

He said he will strengthen the government force by adding thousands of soldiers. He said the additional troops seek to address the security threat of country, both inside and out.

Aside from adding more soldiers on the ground, Duterte said he will also make sure they are provided with high-technology equipment to help them during war.

Marawi crisis

Lawmakers also questioned security officials on the military operations in Marawi.

AFP Chief-of-Staff Gen. Eduardo Año said there is no truth the military operations in the conflict-torn city are in limbo, but the troops are also hopeful that the crisis would soon be over.

AFP Spokesperson Restituto Padila on Monday said the enemy force is getting smaller with only less than 40 Maute fighters left in Marawi, but said the terror group continues to be a threat. Out of the 96 barangays in Marawi, military operations are now only concentrated on two barangays, he said. Padilla also said the hostages' safety is also paramount in the operations.

Lawmakers looked into claims the ammunition used by Maute members could be coming from the government arsenal. Davao City First District Representative Karlo Nograles said if the ammunition comes from a private supplier, then something must still be done about it.

"Kasi mahirap na the worst thing we can have is magkakaroon tayo ng ganitong klaseng encounters tapos yung bala ng kalaban is galing sa government arsenal itself. Siguro may kailangan tayo gawin, hindi matapos-tapos yung gera yun pala posibleng nakakuha sila sa Armscor (Arms Corporation of the Philippines)," Nograles said.

"We are trying to ask Armscor who bought from there and initially the Armscor people, they say they sold a lot of ammunition to gun stores in Mindanao before," Lorenzana said.

Lawmakers noted the 500 percent increase in intelligence funds in 2017 and how the additional P100 million for the 2018 budget could help improve intelligence gathering. Lorenzana explained it will take time to develop intel capabilities and to train people on the ground.

The Defense Department also faced questions on how they could effectively use the additional budget to fight terrorism and protect the Philippine territory, particularly the disputed waters.

Lorenzana explained how Duterte's independent foreign policy is managing conflicting claims in the disputed waters and how this gives the AFP a breather to look into the country's internal security.

Año said it would be better to re-channel efforts on internal security given the threats from local and international terror groups.

"Right now there is no peace negotioation with CPP-NPA with the declaration of CPP-NPA to start nationwide offensive against our troops, so we have to address that also, we can't develop our territorial defense capability if there's that problem of internal security," he said.