Days after President Donald Trump challenged whether the U.S. should honor its Article 5 collective defense commitments to defend tiny NATO member Montenegro, the Pentagon reassured its Eastern European allies it would continue to be a deterrent presence against Russian aggression and committed an additional $200 million to the defense of Ukraine.

The funds will go toward “training, equipment and advisory efforts to build the defensive capacity of Ukraine’s forces,” the Pentagon said in a statement Friday.

The new funds bring the total amount of U.S. assistance to $1 billion since Russian-backed forces invaded Crimea in 2014.

Congress would stop Trump from leaving NATO, key senators say “If they were seriously planning on withdrawing from NATO, I think it would create a unifying event unlike anything you’ve seen in U.S. history,” says Republican Sen. Thom Tillis.

The new funds are a sharp contrast to comments Trump made to Fox News after his meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Trump’s comments seemed to stun NATO member countries, who have been working with the U.S. to increase military rotations and shorten the amount of time it would take for forces to assemble along Europe’s eastern flank to deter against any further Russian incursions. Montenegro joined the alliance in 2017.

“You know, Montenegro is a tiny country with very strong people... . They are very aggressive people. They may get aggressive, and congratulations, you’re in World War III. But that’s the way it was set up," Trump said.

On Thursday the government of Montenegro issued a response to Trump’s remarks, emphasizing their commitment to NATO and contributions to Afghanistan.

“In today’s world, it does not matter how big or small you are, but to what extent you cherish the values of freedom, solidarity and democracy,” the government said.

× Fear of missing out? Sign up for the Early Bird Brief - a daily roundup of military and defense news stories from around the globe. Thanks for signing up. By giving us your email, you are opting in to the Early Bird Brief.

The Pentagon said the funds would also “enhance Ukraine’s command and control, situational awareness systems, secure communications, military mobility, night vision, and military medical treatment.”

No timeline was provided on the delivery of those systems. Ukraine is not a member of NATO.