DPI, Guyana, Wednesday, August 8, 2018

The Guyana Defence Force’s Air Corps added two Britten-Norman Islanders to its fleet. The aircraft arrived at Air Station London, Timehri late this afternoon to a water salute.

Commander of the GDF’s Air Corps, Lieutenant Colonel Courtney Byrne explained to the Department of Public Information (DPI) the planes will be able to effectively perform 10 out of the 13 Air Corps tasks.

One of the Islander arriving to a water salute Chief of Staff of the GDF, Brigadier Patrick West [centre], Commander of the Air Corps, Lieutenant Colonel Courtney Byrne [second right] and Major Mohinder Ramjag, Officer in Command at the Flight Operations Department [second left] among other GDF officials pose in front one of the Islanders A firefighter gets a closeup look at one of the Islanders shortly after it arrived at Air Station London, Timehri

Byrne said the aircraft are best suited for Guyana’s rough, mountainous terrain, high altitudes and short hinterland airstrips. “These aircraft can perform these missions well. They are adapted for this kind of terrain.”

Earlier this year, Minister of State, Joseph Harmon had sought supplementary provision of $484Million in the National Assembly to procure two Islanders and two Sky vans.

The Islanders that arrived today were brought in Brazil and flown across the border by a team of GDF pilots. Major Mohinder Ramjag, Officer in Command at the Flight Operations Department, led the team that flew the planes to Guyana.

The GDF will now have the planes certified and registered by the Guyana Civil Aviation Authority (GCAA). “We already have highly qualified pilots to fly these aircraft and we have engineers who are also qualified to maintain these aircraft,” Byrne said.

Lieutenant Colonel Byrne assured that the refurbished planes can provide more than 30 years of service to the Air Corps.

Chief of Staff of the GDF, Brigadier Patrick West, and other GDF officials were on hand to witness the arrival of the aircraft. There will be an official handing over ceremony for the aircrafts tomorrow.

By: Tiffny Rhodius

Images: Keno George