Welcome to the new home of the Joint Electronic Library. Please update your bookmarks to reflect the new URL: http://www.jcs.mil/Doctrine.

To submit questions or feedback for the Joint Electronic Library, contact us.

News:

Effective 1JAN19 per Director Joint Force Development: Joint Doctrine constitutes official advice; however, the judgment of the commander is paramount in all situations. This description will be captured in joint doctrine policy and materials (e.g., joint publication prefaces) and implemented going forward.

Enlisted PME & Talent Management Vision

This document provides the collective vision of the Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (SEAC) and the Service Senior Enlisted Advisors towards a 21st Century Enlisted Professional Military Education (EPME) strategy.​

Joint Doctrine Hierarchy Chart, February 2021

The current status of Joint Publications presented in a hierarchical format.

DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, January 2021

As directed in Joint Publication (JP) 1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States, the DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms (DOD Dictionary) sets forth standard US military and associated terminology to encompass the joint activity of the Armed Forces of the United States.

The Terminology Repository for DOD (OSD/JS) Issuance FOUO was updated on the DOD Terminology Program page on JEL+ on 14, January 2021.

CJCSI 5120.02E, Joint Doctrine Development System, 06 November 2020

This instruction establishes policy to assist the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) in developing joint doctrine for the employment of the Armed Forces of the United States in accordance with Title 10, United States Code, Section 153 of reference a.

CJCSM 5120.01B, Joint Doctrine Development Process, 06 November 2020

This manual establishes adaptive joint doctrine procedures in support of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s (CJCS’s) responsibility to develop doctrine for the joint employment of the Armed Forces of the United States, as directed in reference a and as established in references b and c.