Country of origin Ukraine Entered service 2008 Crew 3 men Dimensions and weight Weight 46 t Length 8.89 m Width 3.56 m Height 2.74 m Weights Lifting capability 25 t Winch capacity 25 - 75 t Towed load ~ 50 t Earth working capacity 120 m³/h Armament Machine guns 1 x 12.7 mm (450 rounds) Mobility Engine 6TD / 6TD-2 diesel Engine power 1 000 / 1 200 hp Maximum road speed 60 - 65 km/h Range 450 km Maneuverability Gradient 60% Side slope 40% Vertical step ~ 1 m Trench ~ 2.8 m Fording 1.8 m Fording (with preparation) 5 m The Atlet (athlete) armored recovery vehicle was developed as a private venture. Sometimes it is referred as the BREM-84. It is similar to modern Western ARVs. Typical tasks of the Atlet include recovery of damaged or overturned armored vehicles on the battlefield. It also provides maintenance service or tows them to maintenance units. The Atlet ARV was officially accepted to service with the Ukrainian Army in 2008. However only one vehicle was built. This armored recovery vehicle is also proposed for export customers. A small number of these ARVs (BREM-T) have been exported to Thailand. Recently some sources reported that Pakistan ordered 12 of these Ukrainian armored recovery vehicles alongside with 294 Oplot-M main battle tanks for delivery in 2018-2021. The Atlet ARV is based on a modified T-80UD main battle tank chassis. It can be also based on the chassis of more recent Ukrainian Oplot main battle tank. It is fitted with a crane, winch and a front-mounted dozer. Crane of this armored recovery vehicle is hydraulically operated and can lift up to 25 t, which is adequate for most missions. The crane is installed on a rotary platform. It is capable of lifting the turret of most main battle tanks. It is also used to lift powerpacks of the MBTs, or for other load-lifting works. If repairs are required to a vehicle's suspension, the crane raises the front of back of the vehicle to allow access to the damaged system. When not required the crane lays along the right side of the hull. The main mechanical winch is provided with 130 m of cable and has a traction force of 25 t. With the help of pulley blocks traction force is increased to 50 and 75 t. The main winch is used for recovery of damaged, stuck, sunken and overturned vehicles. There is also an auxiliary winch with 260 m of cable and a traction force of 900 kg. It is used for delivery of the main winch rope and other cargo handling operations. The Atlet armored recovery vehicle tows damaged, faulty or uncontrolled vehicles, or similar type tanks using rigid or non-rigid hitches. Vehicles are towed to the nearest shelters, assembly points of repair depots. Vehicle has a welding outfit for welding and cutting works in the field. These are carried by one of the crew member. The Atlet also has a set of tools for field repairs. The front-mounted dozer blade is used for clearing obstacles and earth-mowing works, such as preparation of firing positions, covering up of ditches, self-entrenching and so on. Capacity of earth-mowing works in clay terrain is 120 m³/h. The dozer blade is also used to stabilize the vehicle during craning and winching operations. The Atlet ARV has a required level of protection to operate alongside the frontline units. Front arc withstands small-caliber projectile hits, while all-round protection is against heavy machine gun fire and artillery shell splinters. Vehicle is fitted with NBC protection and automatic fire suppression systems. This armored recovery vehicle is armed with remotely controlled 12.7 mm machine gun. It is used for self-defense against ground and low-flying air targets. A total of 450 rounds are carried for this machine gun. This armored recovery vehicle has a crew of three, including commander, driver and handler. There is a special cargo platform at the hull rear. It is used to transport spare engine, gearboxes, spare parts, cargo, additional fuel or other equipment with a total weight up to 1.5 t. The Atlet armored recovery vehicle is proposed with two engine options. The basic is a 6TD turbocharged diesel engine, developing 1 000 hp. A more powerful 6TD-2 engine, developing 1 200 hp, is also available. This armored recovery vehicle is also fitted with auxiliary power unit. It ensures operation of the add-on equipment, such as welding equipment, auxiliary winch and other electric equipment of the vehicle, when the main engine is turned off. With a deep wading kit this ARV fords water obstacles up to 5 m deep. When not in use this deep wading kit is stored on top of the roof. The Atlet ARV can be airlifted by the An-124 or similar heavy cargo aircraft. Variants BREM-T is a similar armored recovery vehicle with some minor changes to meet specific Thai Army requirements, such as a different radio, air conditioner and so on. . It was specially developed to meet a Thai Army requirement. It was revealed in 2013. It is based on the Oplot-M chassis and is designed to support these main battle tanks. Thailand ordered a total of 49 Oplot-M tanks and required a dedicated ARV to support them. Can't find what you're looking for?