"Patriot will enhance Polish, European and NATO security while creating jobs in Poland and the US," said Tom Laliberty, vice president of Integrated Air and Missile Defense at Raytheon's Integrated Defense Systems business.

Patriot is the backbone of NATO and Europe's defense against ballistic and cruise missiles, advanced aircraft and drones. Fifteen other nations depend on Patriot to protect their citizens and armed forces, including the U.S. and six other European nations: Germany, Greece, the Netherlands, Spain, Romania and Sweden.

This contract is for Phase I of "WISLA," Poland's two-phase medium-range Integrated Air and Missile Defense procurement. Under Phase II, Poland has the potential to acquire additional Patriot fire units and has expressed interest in gallium nitride-based 360-degree active electronically scanning array radars, and SkyCeptor™, a low-cost interceptor missile.

Raytheon's Patriot is a missile defense system consisting of radars, command-and-control technology and multiple types of interceptors, all working together to detect, identify and defeat tactical ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, drones, advanced aircraft and other threats.

About Raytheon

Raytheon Company, with 2017 sales of $25 billion and 64,000 employees, is a technology and innovation leader specializing in defense, civil government and cybersecurity solutions. With a history of innovation spanning 96 years, Raytheon provides state-of-the-art electronics, mission systems integration, C5I™ products and services, sensing, effects, and mission support for customers in more than 80 countries. Raytheon is headquartered in Waltham, Mass. Follow us on Twitter.

Note to Editors

The 16 Patriot Nations are:

United States of America

The Netherlands

Germany

Japan

Israel

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Kuwait

Taiwan

Greece

Spain

Republic of Korea

United Arab Emirates

Qatar

Romania

Poland

Sweden

http://www.raytheon.com

Raytheon Company

Integrated Defense Systems

Media Contact

Mike Nachshen

+1.520.269.5697

[email protected]

SOURCE Raytheon Company

Related Links

http://www.raytheon.com

