Field Marshal Khalifa Belqasim Haftar wants the world to know he has weapons. They’re vintage weapons, true, but in combination makes for a substantial...

Field Marshal Khalifa Belqasim Haftar wants the world to know he has weapons. They’re vintage weapons, true, but in combination makes for a substantial arsenal. Since seizing control of Benghazi four years ago, Haftar’s forces — under the political framework of the House of Representatives — have expanded to control eastern Libya with the support of Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and Russia.

The operation to take Benghazi, Operation Dignity, is now a holiday and one celebrated in grand, dictatorial style. Photos from the Libyan army’s general staff — meaning Haftar’s forces and not those of the rival Government of National Accord in Tripoli — released photos of some of the hardware that survived the war and is still operational.

It is also a power move, coming soon after the 75-year-old Haftar’s recent stroke prompted rumors of his imminent demise. The field marshal attended the parade. The point of being a strongman, after all, is to present an image that you mean business.

Above and at top — 2K12 Kub launchers and an R-17 Elbrus missile, pointing vertically. Libyan army photos

2K12 Kub anti-air missiles and an R-17 Elbrus ballistic missile. The launchers with three missiles a piece are Kubs — known by its NATO codename as SA-6 missile systems. Dating to the 1960s, these missiles proved ineffective during the 2011 NATO-led intervention.

Muammar Gaddafi also still had some Elbrus — or Scud-B — missiles at the start of the civil war, but they were similarly ineffective. The Elbrus/Scub-B is a short-range ballistic missile, meaning it can only travel around 300 kilometers, and is also in service in North Korea where it is known as the Hwasong-5.

T-62 and BM-21 Grad missile launchers.

T-62 tanks and Grad missiles. It can be hard to tell T-62s apart from their famous cousin the T-55, but the fume extractor one-third of the way down the barrel marks this machine as one of the former.

This lucky T-62 was likely one of the hundreds acquired by Gaddafi’s forces during the 1970s, meaning it has survived not only Libya’s 1980s-era desert wars with Chad but also the civil war.

The BM-21 Grad multiple-rocket launchers are a Soviet-era Cold War standby.

BRDM-2s. You can’t have a vintage army without BRDM-2s. For decades, the Soviet Union exported these light armored vehicles to every inhabited continent except Australia — Cuba was the one country in North America to receive them.

A cheap, fast-moving and versatile vehicle has kept the BRDM-2 active. In 2013, a year before Haftar’s coup, the Czech Republic reportedly modernized hundreds of Libyan BRDM-2s, preparing them for a new era.