BENGALURU: Ordnance factories making 87 items, including 39 listed under the weapons section, are set to lose the charge, with the ministry of defence (MoD) directing the Army to buy them from the private sector.The decision comes two months after PM Narendra Modi ordered all ordnance factories to “provide a complete listing of products manufactured, along with a photo description of each product, number of items... produced and their value“. TOI had broken the story on February 22.The MoD has asked the ordnance factories to either “wind up or put to alternative use the production facilities for these items in the absence of orders from the user (Army)“. Of the 87 items, 48 are troop comfort articles like blankets, socks and boots.The 39 items under the weapons section include 12 types of ammunition boxes, three types of bombs, seven types of empty shells, two types of binoculars and three vehicles, including the Stallion MK-IV truck.Declaring the 39 items “non-core“, the department of defence production (DDP), under the MoD, said in a circular dated April 27: “These can be sourced from the trade (read private sector)... Army can procure them without an NOC (no objection certificate) from the OFB (Ordnance Factory Board).“ Earlier, the Army was re quired to get an NOC if it wanted to procure these items from sources other than ordnance factories. However, a “minimum 40% value addition (by indigenous firms) is mandatory and the component details to be included in the 40% may be specified by the DPP where required“, Elvius Lakra, undersecretary in-charge of production (I and III categories) said.Over the past three years, the DDP has declared some other items “non-core“ but never at this magnitude. On why such a decision was made, the department explained that it is “a measure to improve operational efficiency of expenditure“. The decision was taken after two committees were constituted to study and submit recommendations to the MoD.Following the circular, the OFB, in an official communication to the factories concerned, has sought details pertaining to manpower among other things. The defence ministry is looking to finalise the much-touted but long-delayed “strategic partnership (SP)“ policy for private sector participation in defence production in the country .Sources said the defence acquisitions council (DAC), chaired by defence minister Arun Jaitley , will meet to discuss the SP policy later this month. “The policy is likely to be cleared in the DAC meeting.The contentious issues have more or less been sorted out,“ said a source. The SP model seeks to create capacity for arms production in the private sector on a long-term basis, over and above the capacity and infrastructure that exist in the defence PSUs, and gradually replace the existing system to award contracts only to the lowest bidder (L-1), as was earlier reported by TOI.It flows from the reports of the Dhirendra Singh and V K Aatre expert committees, which proposed selection and nomination of Indian private sector defence companies as strategic partners for global armament companies to jointly produce weapons systems under the `Make in India' policy.The broadly identified segments in Group-1 are aircraft, helicopters, aero-engine,submarines, warships, guns and artillery, and armoured vehicles like tanks. Metallic materials and alloys, non-metallic material and ammunition figure in the technology areas in Group-2. The SP policy was to be part of the new Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP), which came into effect in April 2016, but has not been finalised till now. This has further delayed the proposed projects for a new fighter production line as well as the Rs 70,000 crore project to build six new-generation stealth submarines.A major bone of contention in the SP policy has been the recommendation that only one private sector compa ny be selected as the strategic partner in each of the seven segments in Group-1, while two are nominated in each category in Group-2.Moreover, it was proposed that only those private sector companies be selected that have adequate financial strength, demonstrable manufacturing expertise and ability to absorb technology from their foreign partners.Given all this, there are concerns that defence production in the country may be cornered by only a few big companies. But MoD sources said “transparency and some competitive selection“ will figure in the SP policy that will be cleared to allay such fears.