Despite a slightly higher development budget for certain divisions, the overall military budget has seen a slight reduction from that of the last fiscal year Mahmud Hossain Opu/Dhaka Tribune

Muhith also said the government was taking numerous steps to strengthen Bangladesh’s overall security measures

The overall defence budget in FY2018-19 has fallen slightly to 6.26% of the total budget from 6.43% of the budget for the outgoing fiscal year.

In the forthcoming fiscal year, Tk29,084 crore, or 6.26% of the total proposed budget, has been earmarked for defence services.

In FY2017-18, the amount was Tk25,755 crore, or 6.43% of the total budget proposed.

Of the total defence budget, Tk27,902 crore has been allocated for the Ministry of Defence and Defence Services, and Tk1,152 crore of the amount has been set aside for their development work, according to Finance Minister AMA Muhith’s budget briefing.

In the outgoing fiscal year, they were allotted Tk24,754 crore with Tk680 crore earmarked as development allocation.

Tk1,147 crore has been allocated as operating costs of the Ministry of Defence and other services. The amount was Tk971 crore in FY18.

Tk35 crore has been set aside as operating costs of Armed Forces Division that received Tk30 crore in the last budget.

Placing the national budget in parliament on Thursday, Muhith said projects to enhance the capacity of armed forces are underway.

Air Defence Identification Zone (ADIZ) has been set up in Bangladesh's airspace, and the establishment of two full-fledged air bases in Sylhet is underway, he told the House.

Muhith further said the government was taking numerous steps to strengthen Bangladesh’s overall security measures including the installation of 10 weather observatories at different places, modernization of the air-monitoring system, installation of an automatic weather observation system and wind profilers, preparing digital maps with updated information, establishment of geodetic control network and national spatial data infrastructure and two tidal stations, and upgrading Lidar surveying methods all over the country.